[Applause]
[Music]
interviewer and talk about the work my
name is Rachel who burned the director
of global deponent seniors in many ways
reporters
a couple of things I've learned to
reexamine things are granted to seek
comfort in a place I've learned new
things about things I thought everything
like the difference between illness and
disease secure and as you can help the
ratings and people scientific and
incredibly the aims proper new ideas
made all those reasoning questionnaires
of challenge noise take a hard look at
our region formalism on medieval
institutions through the prism of
profoundly human issues affecting
patients families survivors oncologists
basic researchers and towards the end of
this
she says summary what I see daily what I
caught a cold in first out and where
human suffering concerned scientific and
emotional medical and cultures merged
effortlessly and become inseparable this
synthesis representing a bridal turned
on with cancer research and treatment
even the brain about it this dialogue
with compassion the spines of enemy of
care and consent can liberate us on the
competent complacency of assumed
righteousness and the way things are
done liberate us from the mental cages
we inadvertently imprisoned are soft in
our library
so one welcome to everyone as well some
books are Christ from the heart
some books are biographies some books
are autobiographies some books are
polemics you written all of those in one
book and I thought you would begin the
evening actually by my request to read
two chosen passes actually don't know
what you're going to read I specifically
asked you not to tell me two passages
from the book of your choice and we
talked 1 why you chose them and what
they mean
then you'll have a conversation I hope
to provoke lots and lots of questions in
the audience we have some time to have a
conversation with the audience after
that and we will end with a short film
and that's the entire evening so we'll
start off for that welcoming everyone
and if you wouldn't mind
you took my notes
No
good evening
the Jewish High Holidays have just ended
and one of my dearest friends in Chicago
Eve treeger sent me a little poem that
he found on the margin of his prayer
book because he said it reminded him of
me it's a poem by Rose Osterlund my room
has many doors each opens into another
room with many doors without a word I
walk from door to door from room to room
I hear my silence hear strange voices an
echo of words behind doors that are shut
where is the key the key word
we all know what the key word is
prevention
the consensus today is that prevention
is preferable to treatment yet actions
to make this happen are obscenely
lagging behind in the meantime previous
lives are lost resources wasted as
oncologists we are charged with
providing from diagnosis to death
care to our cancer patients that
enhances their quality of life reduces
pain and suffering are we accomplishing
that and if not then why not and what
can be done to improve the outlook for
future patients are we truly
appreciating the deep tragedy of cancer
at an intimate individual level the
profound devastation of families cancers
social and financial impact it's searing
psychologic traumas above all are we
doing the best we can with available
options or should we be questioning some
of the draconian measures we are
practicing how good all the solutions we
offer if we constantly have to ask
ourselves whether cancer or the
treatment we prescribe will kill the
patient which of the two is worse using
chemotherapy
mooom therapy and stem cell transplant
to cure cancer someone's aptly observed
is like beating the dog with a baseball
bat to get rid of its fleas why is this
the only choice we offer hopes of
finding better drugs using the existing
discovery platforms are using even more
artificial systems of genetically
engineered animals are as realistic as
dissecting the brain and expecting to
find and discover consciousness after 50
years of developing cancer drugs this
way it's time to read
the preclinical model no it's time to
abandon this strategy altogether
Jeremiah's alone or pointless unless a
new strategy accompanies the lamentation
the new strategy is to stop chasing
after the last cell and focus on
eliminating the first better still
prevent the appearance of the first cell
by finding its earliest footprints to
begin the ending we must end the
beginning prevention will be the only
compassionate universally applicable
cure it's not prevention through
lifestyle lifestyle changes individuals
with pristine eating and exercising
habits get cancer because cancer causing
mutations accumulate as natural
consequences of reproduction and aging
of cells the new strategy must go beyond
early detection as practice currently
through mammograms and other routine
screening tests the prevention I am
talking about is through identification
and eradication of transformed cancerous
cells at their inception before they've
had a chance to organize into a bona
fide malignant incurable disease this
may seem as an unattainable utopian
dream but it's achievable in a
reasonable time we are already using
sophisticated technology to detect the
residues of disease that linger after
treatment the last cancer cell can we
not reverse the order of things and use
the tests to detect the first
thank you I thought this would lay the
groundwork for what's coming in the next
hour or so
so there's practically no one in this
room today whose lives have not been
touched by cancer in one way or another
there are many cancer patients in the
room today I want you to know that this
book is not a doom and gloom book at all
in fact it is a very optimistic
forward-looking look in which we are
anticipating that things will not be as
they have been but rather we really have
an exciting new path to tread I think a
lot of people ask me dr. Rosser you're
making all these suggestions but how is
an entire field going to be able to
change and switch I think capitalism
here helps because it has is good points
in competition as long as we can fix a
goal and financially incentivize it
everybody will want to do it think about
the fact that everybody is trying to
develop more and more toxic therapies
where 95% of the clinical trials they
fund are going to fail they know it but
they're still investing billions of
dollars so if we show a different way
and set a new goal I think that that
would be a far more optimistic goal than
a 95 percent chance of failure and then
of course once you set the goal and the
object of desire Nazario the Jumba
Shimizu toffee bar here
nergis key arc say that a big hugger a
gooey one should focus the eyesight on
the object of desire and
and that happens even the blinking of an
eye lashes annoying wish we could look
at the beloved with the eyes of the
narcissus the flower which of course
doesn't blink the great French essayist
Montaigne said something very beautiful
in one of his essays which I'd like to
quote I who boast of embracing the
pleasures of life so eagerly and so
deliberately finding them when I examine
them so minutely little more than wind
but what of that we are all wind and the
wind itself wiser than we takes its
pleasure in veering and blustering
around content with its function it does
not seek stability and solidity
qualities that don't belong to it in
other words it's exactly what
Shakespeare also said to dine on self be
true and then it follows as the night
the day thou canst be false to any man I
had to be sincere to myself and simply
write down what I experience on a daily
basis and as Rachael read that passage
saying suffering is what I see on a
daily basis so I decided that the field
has become too far removed from patience
we need to bring the patient back front
and center and look at everything from
the prison of human anguish
what is the agony that our patients are
going through when we glibly talk about
oh this drug has a 30% chance of
response first of all that means you're
giving a drug to
with 70 where 70% people will not have
any chance of response and then the
response will last not a great length of
time which most of them are not curative
now I am talking about advanced cancer
68% of cancers that are diagnosed today
are cured and there has been a decline
in mortality by 26% that's a very good
message
I think Sid planted that message there's
been as 26% fall in mortality from
cancer but most of it is because of
early detection and people stopping to
smoke so in other words I do really
believe that everyone is anxious to help
the patients but we really are losing
the path by trying to understand every
signaling pathway so because my whole
life is spent as an oncologist seeing 30
to 40 patients every week for the last
35 years I'd like to read a passage from
chapter 5 which is dedicated to Jacy who
the patient who I saw when I was 34
years old and she changed my way of
thinking dramatically I'll just end with
this passage I remember a day earlier in
her disease when Jacy was in an
uncharacteristically somber and
reflective mood she sighed and confessed
that she regretted not having valued her
family more when she was well she
specially mentioned the pointless in
main arguments with her
mother-in-law over trivial issues
leading to days of unpleasantness facing
a lethal illness at the age of 34
JC wished for a second chance so she
could show everyone the better angels of
our nature confinement by disease
allowed her to free her spirit made her
more generous after being in remission
for a year one day she was in clinic for
a visit and mischievously confessed that
in the middle of a recent georgia with
her mother-in-law she suddenly stopped
in her tracks and realized how normal
she must be feeling she had reverted to
her whining and titled temperamental
back.you Esprit disease self and those
are some of my good points she groaned
dr. Raza I tried to emerge a pearl out
of the oyster of my illness instead I've
ended up impersonating the old crab
warning dr. Raza when you find me being
nice suspect relapse maybe it was
because those were my salad days maybe
it was JC's ravishing personality her
youthful stunning good looks are
vulnerabilities as a new mother her
wicked sense of humor her poise her
willingness to be friendly and school of
fresh insecure junior attending in ways
of knowing cancer ways of knowing life
Aristotle defined tragedy as a moment of
discovery the discovery has to be
somehow purged when Oedipus found that
he had killed his father and married his
mother he had to blind himself wandering
off as some kind of a prophet the years
with JC shattered me in ways I was not
aware of until I tried to put myself
back together the destruction and
reconstruction process painful stepwise
rehabilitation of my soul marked by many
false starts and regressions was my
covenant of blinding and
myself I stopped being the newly-minted
warrior oncologist I emerged as someone
who was no longer startled by cancers
infinitely unpredictable testy tones
it's gruesome cruelties rather I became
an adult who had learned to stopped
winning the suffering of individual
patients the mystery of the world is the
visible as Oscar Wilde pointed out not
the invisible Jacy helped me make that
leap from darling in the abyss of
cancers ruthless nihilism to
considerations of more humanistic
humanitarian issues of life and death
Jacy gave no lectures she wrote no books
it was her sober acceptance of the
unspeakable tragedy in a thousand little
gestures that slowly but surely parted
the curtains allowing me to witness
grace in all its heroic splendor she
gave my eyesight the insight it needed
JC made the invisible visible
she opened entire new mysterious worlds
for me to wander in as I negotiated each
new patient who came with their own
unique set of cryptic and mysterious
challenges the best tribute I could pay
her when she died was to pledge my life
to study and cure the disease that took
hers if I have 72 more lives
I would pledge myself 72 more times - JC
if equal affection can not be let the
more loving one be
[Applause]
[Music]
can you help me I thought I've also
begin with one of the one of the most
beautiful I felt a cleavage in my mind
look at my brain in this place I tried
to try to match it scene by scene but
could not make them fit the thought
behind I strove joined unto the thought
before but sequence raveled out of reach
like balls of water flow asking you when
your brain began to split and when you
felt that that key within your mind what
tell me the moment of company the first
cell at the moment of the first book the
moment of the first page on this book
Wow how did that happen what what drove
you to like a full-time college it's
really strange that because I never
considered myself as a writer I still
don't
I'm an oncologist and a scientist and
it's the last thing that would ever
occur to me to write but I think what
forced me to tell the story is shares
are my daughter's best friend Andrew
Andrew was 22 years old and is diagnosed
with an aggressive kind of brain cancer
16 months later he's handed a form to
sign a DNR do not resuscitate form
and he didn't sign it he sent it back
how do you sign a DNR format 23 but that
evening when his father came to spend
the night with him he called them back
and sign the form saying simply I
couldn't do it in the presence of my
mother and sister they are in this room
today and what happened that forced me
to finally tell this to the world is the
first thing he said after his surgery
when he was told that he has cancer
cause he told his mother don't worry mom
just call Astra she is on the cutting
edge of cancer she is going to find some
cure for me don't worry and I have felt
so ashamed since that day how are we
failing the Andrews and owners and JC's
of this world so I think it was a very
emotional and deeply painful experience
that really forced me to start telling
the stories and while telling the
stories ask the questions of why are we
here what are we doing with this the
book is full of story we'll come back to
the story in a second walk us through
what what you imagine might happen in
the future to someone who has brain
cancer let's pause that part for a
second let's split what the audience are
limited to the
of cancer diagnosis and treatment
walkers in the United States for the
last ten years as to what has happened
epidemiology what give us a landscape
view of what's happened wherever there
did successes and what the failing isn't
there that's a question that should be
close to everybody's heart because
cancer is something that one in three
men and one in two men and one in three
women are likely to get so the incidence
of cancer increases with age our
population is aging and that's a good
thing but that's putting everybody at
higher risk of cancer is true right so 1
into 1 and 3 this is basically in other
words something that is bound to affect
your life how many people in this
audience are totally familiar with the
landscape of cancer this is the one
disease in other words how many people
know what's happened in the last 20 odd
years to be changing or altering
epidemiology of cancer so that one in
every five wanna be 10 so tell us the
war what has happened so disease a very
aging disease of aging and the problem
second problem is that despite billions
of dollars spent in research and
millions of papers we are still using
the same strategies to treat cancer
chemotherapy radiation therapy and
surgery except for rare exceptions which
are working in small rare types of
cancers this is the backbone of cancer
treatment today 68% of cancers are cured
today 68% are cured but how with Slash
poison and burn and so it's not a
painless procedure my question is why
after 50 years are we
still using these draconian things first
of all even though we are care curing
68% people we don't need to pat
ourselves on the back and give eachother
gold medals for it and the second
problem is the 30 plus percent who are
diagnosed when the disease is advanced
their chances of survival are pretty
much the same as they were 50 years ago
that's the landscape walk us through the
to what much what might happen
scientifically as we talk about what
might happen on a human level but what
might happen cycling see how would you
like to see that change and then let's
talk about something is that those
changes sometimes the most visible
things are the most invisible to us and
one of the things that Andrews case
really drove home to me that no ageism
new from cancer and the second thing is
that it is a painless killer the disease
can be so advanced in your body and you
have no idea what's going on we think we
know our bodies no we don't at all and
so the idea is that why are we waiting
for it to to have reached a stage where
it was inoperable unresectable so what
would what San Angeles done and what
should people do if they what should a
Linda I think what we need to do now is
to start thinking about how to change
this the whole landscape from anybody
being detected lead to everybody being
detected early how do we do that so far
we have brought down cancer mortality
just by very gross screening measures
like mammography pap smears PSA
colonoscopy that's made a big difference
you diagnose cancers early and you treat
them early but those are very gross
measures done annually I am saying we
should be treating the human body like a
machine and constantly monitoring it for
the appearance of any kind of diseases
disease in fact the way I see the future
health care going is all towards
prevention and proactive measures rather
than treatment yes I think so what we
need to do is use the latest technology
whether it's scanning and imaging or
devices or development of biomarkers
from blood and saliva and sweat and
tears and breaths and urine and stool
from everything we should be able to
monitor so the way I imagine the future
to be would be that we need to go now
and use serious rigorous scientific
methods to develop the technologies that
will be unraveled the earliest
footprints of cancer so let's say that
we start monitoring blood and saliva and
urine at regular intervals right now
from healthy individuals for the next
ten years well some of them will develop
multiple sclerosis somebody will develop
cancer somebody so what was that that
happened nine ten years ago before their
diagnosis how can we develop these
technology so what we are working on is
trying to combine all these measures
together eventually so that ideally what
would happen to a future andrew is
a child is born even in infancy we are
able to implant a chip or a device under
the skin which is constantly able to
test for the appearance of abnormal
whether it's proteins or in cell-free
DNA or its micro RNA or it is a barcode
for various proteins associated with
brain cancer or bone marrow tumors or
breast cancers we should have the
technology to do all this and this is
where we need to to imagine the future
and rules to be some of these
technologies have been mentioned and
their record has been quite mixed so the
MOG Rafi for instance if you look at the
look at them over the years
everyone beautifully does their
mammogram the impact on survival but
from mammography alone has been
extraordinarily minimal the PSA is much
worse in fact the PSA actually increased
the incidence of prostate cancer and
caused hundreds of thousands of fafsas
the best example of this is there's a
famous story of doctors in South Korea
were sold ultrasound devices and they
began to use the ultrasound devices to
monitor for thyroid cancer the incidence
of thyroid cancer went up 1,000% yeah
the number of deaths from tired cancer
went up went up by one percentage driven
syndrome so in other words they would
find a lots and lots of cancers which
were not likely to kill you the opposite
end of the spectrum of course are
fasting areas which are which absolutely
save lives and other detection
technologies so what level of confidence
should be
that we will not go down the same road
again
and and do two things one of them is
cause patience the toxicity of
overdiagnosis to imagine a young annual
and suddenly if you find something and
then you know it's an incidental shadow
is found on his in his brain and you
know one thing leads to another biopsy
etcetera lasers and toxicity the patient
and secondly how do we prevent a the
financial toxicity that will come to the
healthcare system in general if everyone
was if everyone is room at a device for
a scan we would bust the bank how can we
be confident that the new area would
bring these changes reduces confidence
yeah said I have to confess that for a
while when I was growing up in my family
the definition of a bum was anyone over
18 not going to medical school so I have
lots of siblings who are doctors and my
younger sisters at the Brigham the
radiologist member her book is the
acknowledged test book or my mantra
field surah rasa and she and I have this
conversation very often about
mammography and its place and she
literally has a fit whenever I say over
diagnoses over treatment because she
says okay just putting in a needle to do
a fine needle aspirate if I find
something abnormal that is supposed to
be much more hurtful than finding a
cancer that spread all over for God's
sake she doesn't accept this at all
secondly I have to also agree with you
that these techniques for screening have
been milked to their maximum benefit
that's it we are not going to get
anywhere more with them but that those
are not the gross techniques I am
talking about why in this day and age
with such sophisticated technology
available that there are
I mean everything on iCloud everything
that we do these days is just done by
super sophisticated technology why not
use all of those to now use them in in
developing the tests that we need for
early detection and let's say that my
chip that I have implanted in somebody
detects an abnormal cell why should we
rely on a single test to be the ultimate
answer for trouble that should then be
supplemented by 20 other tests is there
if there is an abnormal cell is the cell
indicating a potentially lethal illness
or not and if yes then what is the
aggressiveness of that disease all those
things we should be able to distinguish
between then you talk about the
financial burden many people ask me dr.
Rizzo isn't it true that now the pharma
companies are going to be very upset
with you because I am saying that a lot
of the drugs that we are developing are
not helping patients in fact they are
hurting a lot more patients than they
help but absolutely not I don't agree
with that because in fact in reality
right now the pharma companies only have
to deal with individuals who have cancer
and there is 1.7 million new cancer
patients that are diagnosed every year
but if we start monitoring every healthy
individual there will be the whole
country at their disposal and then think
about it that sequencing the human
genome first time around took 15 years
and a billion dollars and today we do it
in a week for how much
a thousand dollars the
is the beauty of capitalism at some
level that within 20 years the
sequencing that cost a billion dollars
costs a thousand dollars today
everybody gets vaccinated are we going
to be concerned about the economic
crisis that's going to come but anyway
what about the average cancer drug today
that's helping 20 to 30-percent patients
for five months median cost hundred
thousand dollars a year aren't we
wasting all these resources aren't we
hurting patients right now we are
worried about oh we might detect
somebody early and over diagnose over
trees no we shouldn't be doing that
either we should protect every
individual today when our drug works in
30 percent patients this is called a
game-changer things are proclaimed from
the rooftops but has some and when I
criticized this in one of our meetings
at Columbia University somebody said to
be well as Ray you may think so but my
patient lived for eight months and those
eight months really mattered because the
patient was able to go and visit and
attend his grandson's graduation and I
couldn't agree more with this that of
course it matters even eight months
matter even two months of improvement in
survival matter but first of all didn't
even think about the 80% patients who
had to take the same drug and did not
respond at all but suffered all the
toxicities and 42% people in this
country today if they are diagnosed with
cancer 42% will become completely
financially ruined at two plus years I
have patients said who will travel from
New Jersey by train and subway with the
hemoglobin of five and six grams because
they cannot afford to take a cab because
all their money
is where is it going who is benefiting
from this and we can't just keep blaming
pharmaceutical companies all of us are
to be blamed the wastage is terrible so
why are why aren't people looking at
what's happening now the country is
going bankrupt it is an unsustainable
healthcare system right now especially
in oncology we should be really looking
at this and if nothing comes out of my
book although the solution is right in
the title the first cell but you can
ignore even the title if nothing else
comes out at least understand what the
problem is because right now the issue
isn't that we don't have a solution for
cancer the issue for me is that we are
not even appreciating the problem in all
its entirety so at least we should be
able to come to terms take off the
blinders and see what we are doing to
find these first cells so now there are
you know as as we as the field is moved
forward there are companies their
efforts the NIH is really an effort the
companies like Grail that are leading
efforts to find the mutations in
circulating DNA for instance but most of
those studies may be the first
generation studies have not come out to
be resounding successes is that because
of a systemic problem in the way those
settings are done are we wait are we
doing something wrong there in other
words let's say that that one sign you
up do now direct the first cell center
which of course have initiated but well
how do you change course even among the
believers I think we have to do the
science there's just no getting away
from it and science costs money
I started my career in 1977 when I came
to this country but did my residency and
fellowship and then
in the 80s I started serious study and
treatment of oncology patients and I
started by treating acute myeloid
leukemia but within seven years it was
clear to me that in my lifetime this
disease will not be cured it is so
vicious and aggressive so the only thing
I knew was okay let's try to diagnose it
early and stop intercept before it
reaches this end stage monstrosity and
so I started paying attention to pre
leukemia and following these patients
along the natural history of their
diseases as they progress towards acute
leukemia pre leukemias are called
myelodysplastic syndromes and the third
of these patients can develop into acute
leukemia as soon as I decided to do that
here is where being an immigrant really
helps me because had I gone to school in
this country the next step would be to
make an animal model to study the
disease but I was a naive Pakistani
young person who didn't know any better
and I said if I'm going to study this
disease I need cells so I just started
saving both marrow and blood cells on my
patients and putting them into a bank
and today that tissue bank has over
60,000 samples from thousands of
patients studied longitudinally many
patients are sitting in this room today
which is so humbling for me who have
given me cells 10 years ago and now
continue to give those their samples
that are banked so the idea is now that
technology has evolved now that we have
all the tissue samples why not go ahead
and apply the technology to see what
caused this progression working our way
backwards to pre leukemia and then who
are the patients who are susceptible to
get even MDS or PD you keep me and why
did they get it was there a particular
genetic makeup germline DNA polymorphism
that they were born with was what made
them at risk of this disease and once we
identify let's say 5,000 patients in
tissue Bank have an extra chromosome 8
abnormality and those who had extra
chromosome 8 many of them tended to have
a particular kind of DNA they were born
with
well once we identify that now we can go
to the kind of public domains where
sequences of normal individuals are
present and see how many have that
abnormality and that's why how you move
to now from pre leukemia to start
screening healthy individuals so I think
for me the road is very clear-cut
we need to study samples of human tissue
not try to create an abnormal disease in
animals and try to study that we have to
study human samples using the latest
technology we cannot cut corners
there'll be many slip between cup and
lip but hey we have to keep going this
is why I'm so excited young people are
in the room today they have to keep
carrying on and doing this rigorous
science and I think the the kind of
technology the Grail and other things
that you mentioned they are in their
infancy of course it will take some time
for us to develop but what we have to do
is stop wasting all the resources on
things that are not helping people
especially our patient that's why in the
book I make a big distinction between
disease and illness disease is something
that doctors diagnose and they treat
illness is something that patients are
going through we have become almost
blind to the illness part we are so
focused on trying to find a cure for the
disease even for 20% patients that we
really have ended up distancing
ourselves from our very first rule that
we are taught as doctors first do no
harm
we are harming our cancer patients and I
think that enough is enough going
forward we have to
sir it says it's an incredible it's
incredible profession that holds as as
its primary model something in the
negative don't do something most
professions encourage you to do things
ours encourages us not to do something
and that's because not not then it's not
a joke it's because of the magnitude
there is no other profession that
carries the magnitude of the burden of
no one has given has been given and what
a beautiful book you have written about
the history of all this it's it's you
know I'm SIDS greatest admirer and in my
opinion there is no better science
writer ever then said mccurdy I say this
to him all the time but because I think
that the way Sid has really put together
the whole story and the Emperor of all
maladies was also an eye-opening thing
for me but was just reading everything
in one place it was an amazing tour de
force that you came up with so I agree
completely that that I think the whole
the whole field has been do's and dont's
but yet we are not getting anywhere so
I'm not saying I have all the answers
first of all I am defining the problem
better at least based on my patients
anguish and not just Andrew and Omer who
I adored yes yes so I think that that I
think all of these examples of patients
tell us that at least it's time to
accept the way things are being done as
if there's an inherent righteousness
ending I mean
the beginning because the subtype of the
book was very moving to me it says that
the human cost of pursuing cancer to the
last you know you might come to this
book thinking that this book is about
dying well by the end hope you realize
this book is about living thinking about
about is not about not only eagle of
compassion around dying it is being
compassionate among those who live and
so one of the most interesting things in
in this book is that there are so many
visible patients that you begin to then
think about the invisible patients or
rather what you might call the invisible
cremations the people who haven't yet
developed and that's one of them to me
that was one of the great completely
mysteries of this book and about the
great very intuitive powers of reading
the book is that there was Story upon
story on story of people who succumbed
and therefore there it becomes a critic
or it becomes a cry for the heart about
trying to not make everyone into those
stories how do we prevent this from
happening how do we not not have them
before we open up to the audience
tell us most people have heard this tell
us about your own transformation as you
as you watched Harvey through his to his
illness I mean this is a very personal
journey for you this is not someone
else's you're not just writing as an
oncologist you're writing as a wife and
as a mother tell us that story and then
we open up to the audience and tell us
what we taught you how how could we what
should we have done differently
shares up my daughter was only four
years old when Harvey was diagnosed and
eight when he died and few weeks after
he died she developed the flu or
something and she has suffers from
severe asthma so she was that got
aggravated she was very sick high fevers
but four or five days later she started
to improve and yet one morning I'm
sitting in the living room and working
and suddenly eight-year-old Shahzad came
out crying hysterically unconsolable I
was convinced that she has had a relapse
she's worse but it was impossible for
her to stop crying finally when she got
a hold of herself all she could say well
mom actually I am feeling fine now but
now I know how terrible it feels to be
sick and how good it feels to get better
but my dad never got better
that really struck me that an
eight-year-old is able to empathize so
deeply with her father although he took
every care possible not to let on a
whole contingent of people are here from
Chicago
Laxmi Villa Naomi Shivan they all saw me
going through this they were there the
whole time and we were in this together
in a way when you are actually in the
situation cancer is such a dizzying
disorienting thing because as hobby'
himself pointed out no sooner do you get
used to one situation the things change
and then you have to reorient yourself
all over again
how are we son Marcus here shares our
desire of course and his daughter Sarah
and Vanessa couldn't come but they were
there the entire time and yet nobody
could appreciate how much pain herbie
went through and i couldn't appreciate
how much pain other cancer patients go
through until i shared a bed with a
cancer patient and saw the suffering
did it change me as an oncologist I
don't think so Sid because I always have
taken care of my patients the same way
but it certainly changed my eyes forever
everything around me was the same but my
eyes changed and my perceptions changed
entirely thank you for setting setting
the entire
were straight and thank you for
identifying the problem and a keyboard
for showing us where the where the
gaping holes are they said there's an
Emperor's New Clothes quality about this
book and so another cracker could have
been the Emperor for all maladies
without any clothes but what kind of
response have you made the last question
what kind of response have you gotten
from the from the gangster community how
how has it reacted it's a very
provocative book what is the what is the
reaction then what what are people your
honor oncologist colleagues your friends
your folks you know what the National
Institutes actually I think very
positive reaction is because it seems
like everyone's ready to hear this so
there will be some disgruntled people
I'm sure but I haven't heard from them I
asked for a moment to just thank a few
people before we proceed with opening
this to the audience so I want to begin
by thanking Rachel who has been a dear
friend for all these years I have been
in New York and Asia Society for
organizing this amazing program and of
course many thanks to Sid the most
multi-dimensional individuals I have met
all I can say is that speaking about
speaking about a book on cancer in his
presence felt like bragging about a
flood in the presence of Noah
thanks to all my patients many of you
are here tonight as our families of many
of those who are not with us special
thank you to my dearest friend Naheed us
for mother of Omar in chapter one
despite every effort to travel from
Karachi and be here tonight Naheed had
to cancel a trip at the last minute a
very special thanks to Elena Andrews
mother and to Kat Slutsky his sister who
along with Shahrazad co-authored the
Andrew story thanks to the leadership of
Columbia University and the
administrative staff the nurses
researchers oncologists they are simply
the best people to work with many of you
are here thank you a special thanks to
dr. Abdul Ali the current director of
the hungriest translational research lab
and to dr. Naomi Galilee the previous
director these are two of the most
brilliant scientists and best friends
that I could ask for and a big thanks to
mr. Mohammad Mumtaz who has been
meticulously maintaining and guarding
the tissue repository with his life for
two decades
Thank You Mumtaz gee thanks to all the
folks at basic books Lera TJ Liz Kelsey
Nancy Rachel's Melissa thank you so much
of course thanks to my siblings my
sister-in-law Nazli my nieces and
nephews who've all been cheering me on
throughout my life and now through the
process of the book I want to single out
my younger brother Abbas to thank Abbas
resides the founder of the
internationally acclaimed website three
quarks daily he has been my best editor
since he turned 19 very tough he
published shorter and abbreviated
versions of several chapters on three
quarks daily website starting 18 years
ago with Harvey's obituary a deep
gratitude is owned - Harvey's children's
Sarah and Mark and Vanessa I want to
thank my daughter Shahrazad besides the
love support and encouragement she gives
me cher has done the audio version of
the book as well
it's really great I recommend it when I
write in America as a 24 year old
immigrant I found a warm and welcoming
home here I understood the meaning for
the first time of what Immanuel Kant has
said which is that hospitality means the
right of a stranger not to be treated as
a stranger it is because of this spirit
of hospitality in America that I can say
to Shahrazad and to all the young people
in this room do not give in to darkness
being forecast in your future instead
live up to the uniquely generous spirit
of this country be aware that in this
theater of life it is reserved only for
God and for Angel
to be lookers-on for the rest of us it
is essential to become alive and work
very very hard to carve out our own
destinies and no country will give you a
better chance than the United States
so I thank the US for helping educate
myself and to the audience I would like
to end by saying or quoting from Alfred
Lord Tennyson's the long day Wayne's the
slow moon rises the deep moons round
with many voices come my friends it's
not too late to seek a newer world for
my purpose still hold to sail beyond all
the bands of stars in the western sky it
may be we shall touch the Happy Isles
maybe we shall see the great Achilles
whom we knew for tho much is taken much
abides and tho we are not now that force
which in olden days moved heaven and
earth that which we are we are one equal
temper of heroic heart's made weak by
time and fate but strong in will to
strive to seek to find and not to yield